---
layout: page
title: Open-source for PhD students
description: Contributing to open-source is for everyone, especially PhD students!
importance: 1
img: assets/img/value-oss/pymc-logo.png
---

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/pymc-logo.png class: "img-fluid rounded mx-auto d-block" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    </div>
</div>

As a PhD student moving to a new city at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, remote schooling has inadvertently put a strain on learning and networking. However, this also presented an opportunity to be immersed in an environment that thrived in the online format: open-source. My current involvement with the community of PyMC, a Python library for Bayesian modeling, started from being curious and bored during lockdown and was catalyzed by stumbling across an opportunity to contribute to the codebase via Google Summer of Code (GSoC). Now, I am working part-time for PyMC Labs and I will start my second summer as a GSoC student and take the time to learn more about Dirichlet Processes (DP), [Aesara](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aesara/) and [AePPL](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aeppl) under the mentorship of [Ricardo Vieira](https://github.com/ricardoV94) and [Brandon Willard](https://brandonwillard.github.io/). Above all, I feel happy. Here is my journey so far.

### **February 2020: Pre-Pandemic**

My last 5 years at a student at McGill University were amazing. I met incredible people and I really enjoyed learning in this environment: Montreal's liveliness, my part-time job as a campus tour guide and lots of statistical theory. Above all, I spent countless hours in the most beautiful building on our campus: Burnside Hall.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/burnside-outside.jpg title="burnside-outside" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
            The outside of Burnside Hall, taken in December 2021.
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/burnside-basement.jpg title="example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
            Burnside basement, happiest place on Earth only second to Disney World.
        </div>
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/magid-luis.jpg title="example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
            Luis (left) and Magid (right), two of my closest friends talking about their adventures with complex analysis in Burnside basement.
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

This statement is unironic despite its exterior concrete-slab look of a Minecraft dungeon. On the inside, the walls were no different but, despite its underwhelming appearance, there was something that energized me on a daily basis: a vibrant community. No matter the position of the sun, there were always people around to talk about math, programming or statistics or to vent when school becomes stressful. As the pandemic hit on Thursday, March 13, 2020, I knew that it would take a while before I can be surrounded by the same concrete and people again.

### **July 2020: Beta Variant and DP Summer School**

The first pandemic summer was not terrible as I spent most of my time finishing my Master's thesis and mentally preparing for my upcoming PhD studies. I was skateboarding more and eating far too much fruit yogurt just because I could. I missed my biostat and Burnside friends very much, but we were still able to keep touch via Zoom.

Dr. Alexandra Schmidt, a Bayesian professor at McGill's EBOH department, was a big inspiration of mine for learning about Bayesian statistics. That summer, she organized a [workshop on Dirichlet Processes](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLHaWeIntAtAIjrTCeQ5ZfNlG2HRvtGOu4) taught by Dr. Peter Mueller, a well-established researcher in that area. Admittedly, I did not understand _anything_ beyond the first 20 minutes of the first lecture but I found the whole paradigm very fascinating. Little did I know that this exposure to such a daunting non-parametric method was the beginning of something much bigger for me.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/peter-mueller-ipad.png title="dp-class" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
            "A Dirichlet Process is a prior distribution for distributions. People have also used them as distributions for distributions for distributions. It is simple yet ingenious." - Peter Mueller (I agree with exactly half of the last statement.)
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

### **September 2020: The Beginning of the PhD**

It sucked.

I was welcomed to our new school via a Zoom call as I sat in my parents' basement, a few days after submitting my Master's thesis which was a few days after my ex-girlfriend broke up with me by surprise via a phone call. I knew that the school year would be a long one. I must thank [Dr. Anna Heath](https://lab.research.sickkids.ca/heath/) with whom I did a year-long project on Bayesian analysis of clinical trials for her guidance and moral support for keeping me afloat during the difficult remote schoolyear.

### **April 2021: Applying to GSoC**

After my winter semester, my constant efforts to socially engage with my cohort via Zoom and the ongoing academic workload was starting to tire me. With our three-part comprehensive exams scheduled for August in sight, I knew that I needed change. Regardless of the outcome of my theory exams, I had a strong urge to devote my energy and eagerness to something else. One day in March, as I was browsing my Twitter feed, I came across the following Tweet.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/value-oss/tweet.png title="tweet.png" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" width: 50% %}
        <div class="caption">
            <a href="https://twitter.com/OriolAbril/status/1370130181130686465">The Tweet</a> that would revitalize my PhD experience 🥲
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

To be frank, I thought that the PyMC project was previously in a rough spot because it relied on Theano, a tensor library which was no longer being supported. I knew that this would be an exciting opportunity for the summer as it would complement well my preparation for my highly theoretical (and arguably useless) PhD comprehensive exams.

### **September 2021: Still Online...**

I passed my theory exams for my PhD program and my involvement with PyMC continued. As I started creating more issues and pull requests, I was learning a lot by doing and my confidence grew. My interactions with members of the PyMC community were always positive. Effectively, I was learning about a highly specialized technical topic, (probabilistic) programming, and establishing connections with passionated individuals; these were feelings that I was expecting from my PhD studies which were highly impacted by the global pandemic.

### **Winter 2021-2022: Finding Support**

As winter and the Omicron variant came, more lockdowns were issued in Canada and restrictions were strengthened right during the holidays. We remained online for the fourth consecutive term of my studies and the future was getting bleak on many levels. However, this is when I realized that the PyMC community has many members who had pursued a PhD degree and perhaps experienced some of the confusion that I was feeling, although outside of a pandemic. I figured why not reach out to them, for some support and perhaps some advice about my studies and prospective professional career. 
