---
layout: page
title: AePPL `Switch`-defined mixtures
date: 2022-08-02 12:00:00-0400
description: Maybe a new functionality to AePPL `Switches` would be to play multiplayer games on it 🤔
---

Lately, I have been trying to work on issues 76 and 77 of AePPL in which we would like to extend the library's mixture functionality. See [PR 154 in AePPL](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aeppl/pull/154).

## Mixture modelling in AePPL

The overarching goal of AePPL is to retrieve correct log-probability functions of data-generating models. Diving a little bit more into the details, every data-generating model induces a hierarchical graph which can be build using Aesara's symbolic mathematics toolbox. For instance, in [PR 19](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aeppl/pull/19), mixture models constructed via `at.stack` or `at.join` are currently supported:

```python
import aesara.tensor as at
from aeppl import joint_logprob

srng = at.random.RandomStream(seed=2320)

I_rv = srng.bernoulli(0.5, name="I")
X1_rv = srng.normal(loc=-5, scale=0.1, name="X1")
X2_rv = srng.normal(loc=5, scale=0.1, name="X2")

Z1_rv = at.stack([X1_rv, X2_rv])[I_rv]

z_vv = Z1_rv.clone()
i_vv = I_rv.clone()

logp = joint_logprob({Z1_rv: z1_vv, I_rv: i_vv})
```

Effectively, we can only retrieve the log-probability of the appropriate mixture component if provided numerical values for value variables `z_vv` and `i_vv`. These log-probabilities are **unmarginalized**, that is that AePPL retrieves the log-probability of `X1_rv` or `X2_rv` at the value `z_vv` depending on the index `i_vv`.

## `Switch` mixtures

The `Switch` `Op` is an operator that take in three arguments: the index variable and both components of the mixture model. The index variable served as if the components were in an `ifelse` condition. With a condition that is a dichotomous random variable and both branches that are stochastic as well, i.e. `MeasurableVariable`s, this `Switch` subgraph would be a mixture model and can be replaced by a `MixtureRV` node. Thanks to the indexing functionality provided in [`expand_indices`](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aeppl/blob/main/aeppl/mixture.py#L43) that imitates NumPy's advanced indexing logic, adding a graph rewrite for `switch` and `ifelse` mixtures is not very difficult.

#### Univariate components

Using the same `I_rv`, `X1_rv`, `X2_rv` and corresponding value variables defined above, a `Switch` mixture can be defined as followed:

```python
srng = at.random.RandomStream(seed=2320)

I_rv = srng.bernoulli(0.5, name="I")
X1_rv = srng.normal(loc=-5, scale=0.1, name="X1")
X2_rv = srng.normal(loc=5, scale=0.1, name="X2")

Z2_rv = at.switch(I_rv, X1_rv, X2_rv)

z_vv = Z1_rv.clone()
i_vv = I_rv.clone()

logp = joint_logprob({Z2_rv: z_vv, I_rv: i_vv})
```

In AePPL, graphs rewrites via the `node_rewriter` decorator (previously known as `local_optimizer` since [PR 1054 of Aesara](https://github.com/aesara-devs/aesara/pull/1054) to identify `Elemwise` nodes whose scalar operator is a `Switch`. Here, `I_rv`, `X1_rv` and `X2_rv` are not provided any fancy `size` arguments, so no indexing operations need to be involved.

#### Multi-dimensional inputs

For `Switch`es, both indices and components can be non-scalars. However, for `IfElse` mixtures whose logic is *very* similar, conditions/indices can only be scalar-valued. The identification of which elements in the two inputs as components are selected via indexing is non-trivial; I refer to the following NumPy examples as to what AePPL/Aesara is expected to yield. In the end, the AePPL mixture logic for subgraphs defined by `MakeVector` and `Join`, `Op`s that combine two tensors, need to align with the `Switch`/`ifelse` correspondant indexing operation.

```python
comp1 = np.arange(1, 13).reshape(3, 4)
comp2 = -comp1

np.where(
    [0, 1, 0, 0],
    comp1,
    comp2
)
# array([[ -1,   2,  -3,  -4],
#        [ -5,   6,  -7,  -8],
#        [ -9,  10, -11, -12]])
```

The example above illustrates the expected behaviour when the index is a vector and components a 2D matrix. These should work with arbitrarily defined arrays.

## Future Work

Future work entails:

- As of now, finish the `IfElse` mixture subgraph PRs.
- Extend `MixtureRV`s defined by `at.stack`s to retrieve their appropriate log-likelihood.
- Continue work on (Truncated) Dirichlet Processes for our experimental package (`pymc-experimental`), but that's taken a halt in progress...
